## Overview of landmarking methods

There have been many approaches taken to the problem of landmark fitting, but
they can largely be divided into three categories [@wuJi2019a]: *holistic
methods*, *Constrained Local Models*, and *regression based methods*. The
categories are based on how the facial appearance and facial shape patterns are
modelled and related. In the holistic methods, a model of the global appearance
of the face is related to a global model of the landmark positions. Constrained
Local Model (CLM) approaches train a set of independent models for each of the
facial landmarks, but constrain the locations of the landmarks based on a global
model of the face shape. Lastly, the regression based methods do not explicitly
model the global face shape at all, instead directly relating image data (either
local or global) to landmark locations.

### Holistic methods

The holistic methods for facial landmarking are a family of generative
statistical models, whose prototypical version is known as Active Appearance
Models (AAM), as proposed by Cootes et al [@cooteEdwarEtAl2001a]. AAM works by
learning two connected models using Principle Component Analysis (PCA): a model
of face shape, and a model of global face appearance. These are connected
through sharing the same set of parameters; the joint parameterisation allows
the model to capture appearance variation due to shape, such as teeth appearing
when the mouth is open [@princ2012a]. To simplify the model and make it more
robust, Procrustes analysis [@gower1975a] is used on the training data to remove
variation due to global transformations, and to find the mean face shape; the
images are then warped so that each landmark is moved to its mean location, so
that the appearance model is independent of shape. The goal when fitting the
model to new images is to find both the optimal model parameters and the correct
global transform. In the classic version of this model, fitting is done by
iteratively calculating the error between the image as generated by the current
parameters, and calculating an update to the parameters based on the error
[@wuJi2019a].

*Discuss extensions to the algorithms*

### Constrained Local Models

The central idea of CLM is to model, for each landmark, the likelihood that it
should be placed on a certain part of the image, but to then constrain the final
landmark locations to fit a model of the face shape as a whole. 

CLM models can be traced back work by Cristinacce and Cootes
[@cristCoote2006a]. *Describe basic form of CLM*

*Discuss extensions to the algorithms*

### Regression based methods

*Describe class of algorithm and discuss extensions*


